=head1 NAME

B<RunSimTest> - Run a test over the IB management simulator

=head1 SYNOPSYS

RunSimTest [-h] [-o osm-path][-f flow-file][-c checker-file]
   -t topology [-n osm-node-name][-p osm-port-num][-s seed][-V verbosity-list]

This command starts the simulator and runs the the given test flow
on top of it. Then it runs the checker flow. The default test flow starts
OpenSM and wait for Subnet-Up event. User given flow can make use of the
provided facilities for starting OpenSM and tracking it events.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over

=item -t topology

A topology file describing the fabric (see B<ibdm-topo-file>)

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item -f flow-file

A tcl file sourced by the sim after the fabric is setup. See following discussion about the provided API and global variables that are available for the flow.

=item -c checker-file

A tcl file defining when osm completed and what checks are requierd to validate it's outputs. The procedure named 'checker' is invoked by the test flow to start the checking flow. The default flow waits for OpenSM to complete setup the fabric and run ibdmchk.

=item -o osm-path

Full path to OpenSM (/usr/local/ofed/osm-sim/bin/opensm). NOTE OpenSM should be compiled with --with-osmv=sim to be able to connect to the simulator.

=item -n osm-node

Topology file node name the SM runs on (default H-1/U1)

=item -p port-num

Port number the SM attaches to (default 1).

=item -s seed

Random seed to be used.

=item -V verbosity-list

Module verbosity list. The first should be the global verbosity. See IBMgtSim for full list of modules.
Examples:

 -V 0xffff = Full verbosity on all modules
 -V '"0x3 server 0x6f2 sma 0xffff"' = Only fatal and error
    for all modules full verbosity for the SMA module and default
    verbosity for the Server module.

=item -h

This help message


=head1 AUTHOR

Eitan Zahavi, Mellanox Technologies LTD, eitan@mellanox.co.il
